JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: U.S.
stocks wrap up their worst start
to a new year ever, as
the price of oil trades at its
lowest point in over 12 years.
Then:
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate: I'm not
going to use your mother's birth
against
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Following the
first presidential candidate
debate of the new year, we're
here
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks to talk about the race as
we get close to Iowa.
And Silicon Valley may be the
hot spot for tech jobs, but it
lags when it comes to diversity
in hiring. We look at why.
Plus: A new PBS drama, "Mercy
Street," described as "Gone With
the Wind" meets "MASH," focuses
on medics during the Civil War.
JOSH RADNOR, Actor: There's this
feeling that it's entirely
grounded in its time and place,
and, at the same time, it feels
modern and urgent and vital.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The first two
weeks of 2016 will go down in
Wall Street history for the
biggest losses to begin a year.
Stocks plunged again today, as
oil prices fell below $30
a barrel.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost more than 390 points to
close below 15990. The
Nasdaq fell 126 points, and the
S&P 500 dropped 41. Since the
year began, the Dow and the
S&P are down 8 percent. The
Nasdaq is off 10 percent. We
will get a full report and
analysis after the news summary.
The Obama administration has
ordered a nationwide pause on
issuing new coal leases on
federal
land. That's while the
Department of the Interior
reviews whether coal companies
are paying
enough in royalties to the
government and what the
environmental effects of mining
are.
Roughly 40 percent of the coal
produced in the United States is
mined on federal lands.
Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel faces
new protests today over the
fatal shootings of black
suspects
by police. Demonstrators turned
out at an annual Martin Luther
King Jr. breakfast with
the mayor. Dozens of black
ministers boycotted the event,
but Emanuel pledged to address
their concerns.
RAHM EMANUEL (D), Mayor of
Chicago: We also have to root
out the cancer of police abuse,
because the quest for safe and
secure neighborhoods and against
violence demands trust between
the community and the police.
And when there is no trust,
there is no safety.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There've been
charges of a cover-up in the
death of teenager Laquan
McDonald,
who was shot 16 times by a white
officer in 2014. Video of the
shooting was withheld until
last November. Yesterday,
officials released footage of
the killing of a carjacking
suspect
in 2013.
Coast Guard crews in Hawaii
spent this day searching for
survivors after two U.S. Marine
helicopters collided and crashed
at sea overnight. They carried
12 people on a night training
mission off Oahu. An aerial
search began before first light
and crews spotted a debris field
spread across two miles of
choppy seas. There's no word on
the cause of the crash.
The U.N. children's fund UNICEF
painted a desperate picture
today of starvation in Syria.
Two relief convoys reached the
town of Madaya this week after a
long siege by Syrian government
forces. U.N. workers found
severe malnutrition among
children and local officials
told of
32 people starving to
death in the past month.
Lindsey Hilsum of Independent
Television News filed this
report.
LINDSEY HILSUM: Some food and
medicine is now getting to
Madaya and two towns besieged
by the rebels.
Today, a mobile clinic was
allowed in. The health center is
full of people seeking
treatment.
Her 15-year-old son needs to go
to hospital in Damascus, but,
despite the urgency, the
Red Crescent and the U.N.
haven't yet managed to negotiate
to get people out.
Moadamiya, less than six miles
from the center of Damascus,
hasn't had the same attention
as Madaya. But maybe it should.
She's getting the telltale signs
of malnutrition. Her mother
pulls back her towel and jacket.
"There's no milk for children,"
she says. "Look, her hands are
getting thinner."
The U.N. says 450,000 Syrians
are living under siege across
the country. Moadamiya is held
by rebels who the Syrian
government is trying to starve
into submission.
MAN (through translator): The
regime bombarded the roads into
our town. We're under siege.
The road's been closed for 20
days now. There's no food or
medicine.
LINDSEY HILSUM: Today, the
Russians dropped humanitarian
aid on Deir el-Zour, a town held
by the Syrian government and
besieged by the Islamic State.
At the same time, Russian
aircraft
continued to drop bombs on
rebel-held parts of Aleppo, and
Syrian children continue to
live with the fear
of hunger and death.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Western nations
called an emergency meeting of
the U.N. Security Council today
to demand the warring parties
in Syria end the sieges.
Police in Indonesia now say the
suicide attack in Jakarta that
killed two civilians was indeed
funded by the Islamic State
group. Five of the attackers
died in the assault yesterday.
Overnight, anti-terror officers
arrested several people just
outside Jakarta. It was unclear
if they're directly linked to
the bombings, but the national
police chief promised more
arrests.
MAN (through translator): For
sure, there were people who
helped in the attack, including
those who facilitated the buying
of materials, people who
assembled the bombs and so on.
They are involved in the attack,
so I ordered they be tracked
down and arrested, all the
people involved in the attack,
including its network.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Separately today,
Indonesian President Joko Widodo
visited the site of
the attack and talked to
business owners. He said
everything is back to normal.
In Somalia, the Islamist
militant group Al-Shabaab claims
that it overran an African Union
base
today and killed at least 63
Kenyan soldiers. It happened in
Southwestern Somalia near the
border with Kenya. Witnesses
confirmed the militants took
over the site. Kenya's president
acknowledged casualties,
but gave no numbers.
The U.N. human rights chief
warned today that Burundi is
sliding toward a new ethnic
conflict
between Tutsis and Hutus. He
accused government security
forces of gang rape, torture and
mass killings of
political opponents.
In Geneva, a spokesman for the
U.N. agency said many of the
victims were members of the
Tutsi minority.
RUPERT COLVILLE, Spokesman,
United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights: The suggestion
that an ethnic dimension is now
starting to emerge is reinforced
by one of the sexually
abused women, who said that her
abuser told her she was paying
the price for being a Tutsi.
Another witness claimed that
Tutsis were systematically
killed, while Hutus were spared,
and the decision
to arrest people was also
reportedly largely made on an
ethnic basis.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Burundi suffered
12 years of civil war that
finally ended in 2005. But
the U.N. says that 432 people
have been killed in rising
violence just since last April.
And test results confirm that a
new Ebola death in Sierra Leone
has happened. The news
comes one day after the World
Health Organization declared the
two-year epidemic in Western
Africa was finally over.
Officials say the latest victim
may have exposed at least 27
other people.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
dropping oil prices ripple
through the global economy;
Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze the last GOP debate
before Iowa; boosting diversity
in Silicon Valley; and could
"Mercy Street" became the next
"Downton Abbey"?
Now: the market plunge that is
sweeping across stock exchanges
from Asia to Europe to New
York.
It has been relentless since the
year began, and today was no
different. The closing bell
on Wall Street signaled the end
to a turbulent day and a tough
week for markets worldwide.
Fueling the sell orders, another
plunge on China's Shanghai
Composite Stock Index. It's
down 18 percent since the year
began, as worries about the
Chinese economy mount.
And plummeting oil prices are
dragging down energy company
stocks and the broader market.
In Washington, White House
spokesman Josh Earnest said U.S.
officials are closely monitoring
the global sell-off.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: There's no denying
that weakness in other
markets with whom we do
extensive business is going to
be a headwind for the U.S.
economy.
We're mindful of that,
particularly as the
international economy becomes
more integrated,
and we have to be sensitive to
movements that we see in the
economies of other countries.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. market
was also hurt by disappointing
reports on several major
economic indicators. Industrial
production fell for a third
straight month in December.
And retail sales unexpectedly
dropped a 10th of a percent last
month, partly because warmer
weather hurt winter
clothing sales.
For a closer look at the
dramatic drops in both the stock
market and world oil prices,
we turn to Liz Ann Sonders.
She's chief investment
strategist at Charles Schwab.
And Bradley
Olson, he's national energy
reporter for The Wall Street
Journal.
And we welcome both of
you to the program.
Liz Ann Sonders, what is behind
this volatility today in the
market?
LIZ ANN SONDERS, Charles Schwab:
Many of the same things,
actually, that contributed to
the volatility that
we saw last year.
You have touched on certainly
oil, but it's more broadly
what's happening in the
commodity
complex, and not just the huge
plunge, in and of itself, but
what that says about global
growth. Of course, related to
that is China, the weakness
there, not only in its equity
market, but its economy, its
currency. That is tied into
commodity prices.
And then even more importantly
was the uncertainty regarding
the Fed. We got past the
uncertainty
the defined 2015 in terms of
will they, won't they, and if
they will, when? They got the
first rate hike. Now it's what
are they going to do from here?
Are they going to continue
to raise interest rates? What
will be the justification?
So, a lot of it really is
unfinished business from 2015.
It's just conspired to occur in
a condensed period of time,
unfortunately, right at the
beginning of the year, which
I think adds to the
angst for investors.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Liz Ann Sonders,
staying with you, so is this the
kind of anxiety that's
justified or is this something
that has just gotten out of hand
in the last few days?
LIZ ANN SONDERS: It's really
hard to say at this point. I
would love to know where this
correction stops right here. We
do not think that this is the
beginning of a big, nasty
bear market, but it could get
worse before it gets better.
I think investors have been
fairly skittish really for much
of this bull market all along.
And when you get these bouts of
volatility, particularly if it's
got some fairly dire
news associated with it, we
really hunker down much more
quickly than we have in the
past, because I think we really
changed the psyche of a
generation of investors, not
only
because of the severity of the
financial crisis, but the fact
it came within 10 years from
the bear market
that preceded it.
So, I think that explains why we
see this sense of urgency and
sometimes panic kick
in so quickly in
this environment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bradley Olson,
let's talk about the oil side of
this. What is driving this
continued drop in oil prices?
BRADLEY OLSON, The Wall Street
Journal: Well, there are two
main factors at play.
The first one is a little bit
tied to what's driving the
falling stock markets worldwide,
and that's China. China's sort
of always been the golden goose
when it comes to oil markets,
particularly with demand.
China's about the second largest
oil consumer in the world,
and so whenever there are
indications that the Chinese
economy perhaps isn't going to
be as strong as people had
expected, it causes a great deal
of uncertainty when it comes
to oil.
The second factor is Iran. The
sanctions are about to be lifted
that were imposed by the
United States and the European
Union, and once those sanctions
are up, a lot of people
anticipate a significant a
amount of oil coming into the
market from Iran, perhaps as
many
this year as 500,000
barrels of oil.
So, the market is already
oversupplied, and you're going
to dump additional barrels into
the market from Iran. And then
you have problems or questions
about demand that would have
been able to bring up the price.
So, there's just a lot of
indicators that are not positive
at this time when it
comes to the oil market.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is it,
though, expected that these
countries are just going to
continue
to pump regardless of how
low the price is going?
BRADLEY OLSON: That's right. I
mean, one of the things that you
see happening when the
price goes down is that
everybody's trying to make up
for the lost revenue. And so
this
is something that's actually
happened in the history of oil
crashes, is that all the
producers
and companies actually try to
pump more oil because they're
trying to make up for whatever
they have been losing
by producing more.
In this case, a lot of people
expected the U.S. shale
companies and U.S. companies
that
were behind a major boon in
production in the last few years
to slow down, and they
just haven't done that yet. They
have been a lot more resilient
than anybody expected.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Liz Ann Sonders,
you used the word panic a minute
ago. Compare this to what
was going on in 2008.
LIZ ANN SONDERS: Oh, I don't
think this resembles 2008 by any
stretch, when you think about
the proximate cause for that, it
was obviously a seizure of the
financial system which had
global tentacles and the
leverage associated with that.
And what we're seeing now is a
bit more concentrated in the
commodity space. Leverage in the
financial
system is significantly lower
than it was back then. I think
what we're seeing has a
greater analogy to 1998 than it
does 2008, where you had an
environment where you had
major currency disruptions,
problems in the emerging
markets.
It ultimately caused a
tremendous amount of volatility
and even a very severe
correction
in the U.S. stock market, but it
didn't take the financial system
nor the U.S. economy
down with it, and I think that's
the better analogy than 2008.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So what does that
mean? You talked about the
psyche of investors and how
that's changing, and I think you
mentioned millennials. I mean,
what is different about
the psyche of investors today?
LIZ ANN SONDERS: Well, I think
we're well past certainly the
go-go days of the late
1990s, where there was the cult
of equities and everybody was
enthusiastic about it, it
was a hobby for many.
You didn't quite build that back
up into 2007. The bubble at that
time was more outside the
stock market, in that it was
concentrated in housing. And
those stocks and homes are
the two biggest components of
household net worth, so you have
gotten the hit to both
of those things, which I think
what we have established,
whether it's millennials as
children
of the baby boomers or even the
older generation after that, is
not all that different than
what we saw come out of the
Great Depression, not that this
environment is as extreme as
that.
But it really instituted an era
of deleveraging. And I would
call it a smarter investor,
smarter
consumer. They're not spending
the windfall of these lower oil
prices. Some of it's going
to consumption, but some of it
is going to savings and
continued debt pay-down. That's
the kind of psyche change
I think we're seeing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bradley Olson,
you mentioned previous oil
market crashes. What's the
history
when something like this
happens? How does the price of
oil find its bottom before it
starts to rise again?
BRADLEY OLSON: Well, what we see
-- usually, what they say, and
it's sort of an adage that
exists in the market, is that
low prices cure low prices.
What they mean by that is
whenever companies and even
countries, you know, don't spend
a lot of money, you will see
that follow the oil market about
a year or two years after
they stop spending. And so what
we have seen from the past is
that when you have underspending
for a year or two that doesn't
come to the level that they need
to spend to increase
production or to bring
production to replace all the
oil that they have already put
out
into the market, whenever you
see that happening, that's when
the price starts to come back
up.
Already, the level of spending
is so low in the past two years,
or it's been reduced so
much in the past two years, that
it's already worse than at any
point in any two-year period
in the 1980s. So you already
have the ability to compare this
downturn and this oil and
natural gas crash to the worst
of the periods of the 1980s when
it was also very low.
So you have to go all the way
back to the '70s and the Arab
oil embargo to find a time
when the crash was
as bad as it is now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's given
us all a lot to, not just think
about. Maybe we all need
to turn to the history books in
both the markets and the oil
situation.
Bradley Olson, Liz Ann
Sonders, we thank you both.
LIZ ANN SONDERS: Thanks, Judy.
BRADLEY OLSON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Republican
presidential candidates returned
to the campaign trail
today after squaring off last
night on a debate stage in South
Carolina.
Front-runners Donald Trump and
Ted Cruz dominated the event,
while the rest of the field
continue
to try to keep pace.
"NewsHour" correspondent
William Brangham reports.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate: My
friend Donald said that he had
had his
lawyers look at this from every
which way, and there was no
issue there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The issue is
Ted Cruz's eligibility to run
for the presidency. And
Donald is Donald Trump, who's
been highlighting the fact that
Cruz was born to an American
mother, but in Canada. Early on,
the issue ignited a testy
exchange between the two
candidates
leading the Republican
field in Iowa.
SEN. TED CRUZ: I recognize that
Donald is dismayed that his poll
numbers are falling
in Iowa. But the facts and the
law here are really quite clear.
Under longstanding U.S.
law, the child of a U.S. citizen
born abroad is a natural-born
citizen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Trump, in
turn, insisted the issue would
hang over his rival's head
until it's put to rest.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: And if you become the
nominee, who the hell
knows if you can even serve in
office? So you should go out,
get a declaratory judgment,
let the courts decide.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That set the
tone for a rough-and-tumble
evening, and the candidates
got into it again over the Texas
senator's statements that Trump
embodies -- quote -- "New
York values."
SEN. TED CRUZ: And listen, there
are many, many wonderful,
wonderful working men and
women in the state of New York.
But everyone understands that
the values in New York City
are socially liberal or
pro-abortion or
pro-gay-marriage, focus around
money and the media.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Trump answered
that with a spirited defense of
his hometown, harking
back to the days after 9/11.
DONALD TRUMP: And we rebuilt
downtown Manhattan, and
everybody in the world watched
and everybody
in the world loved New York and
loved New Yorkers. And I have to
tell you, that was
a very insulting
statement that Ted made.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But it wasn't
just a two-man show. Cruz took
aim at Florida Senator Marco
Rubio for his involvement in a
2013 immigration reform
compromise.
SEN. TED CRUZ: It is also the
case that that Rubio-Schumer
amnesty bill, one of the things
it did is it expanded Barack
Obama's power to let in Syrian
refugees. It enabled hi,
the president, to certify them
en masse without mandating
meaningful background checks.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Rubio
counterattacked with a charge
that Cruz himself has gone back
and
forth on a number of issues.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate: Ted
Cruz, you used to say you
supported doubling
the number of green cards. Now
you say that you're against it.
You used to support a 500
percent increase in the number
of guest workers. Now you say
that you're against it.
I saw you on the Senate floor
flip your vote on crop insurance
because they told you it
would help you in Iowa, and last
week, we all saw you flip your
vote on ethanol in Iowa
for the same reason.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Rubio also
sought to take down New Jersey
Governor Chris Christie, a
rival for support of the party's
so-called establishment wing, by
painting his record
as liberal.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: Governor
Christie has endorsed many of
the ideas that Barack Obama
supports,
whether it is Common Core or gun
control or the appointment of
Sonia Sotomayor or the
donation he made to
Planned Parenthood.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Christie, in
turn, dismissed the jibe as all
politics, and no principle.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate: Two
years ago, he called me a
conservative
reformer that New Jersey needed.
That was before he was running
against me. Now that
he is, he's changed his tune.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But Rubio and
Christie saved their toughest
words for the president,
hammering
away all evening.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE: Mr.
President, we're not against
you. We're against your
policies.
And we are going to kick your
rear end out of the White House
come this fall.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ohio Governor
John Kasich and former Florida
Governor Jeb Bush also
kept most of their fire trained
on the White House. And Bush
emerged today with a
high-profile
endorsement from South Carolina
Senator Lindsey Graham, who
recently gave up his own
presidential
bid. The South Carolina
primary is February 20.
First, though, the Republicans
enter the home stretch in Iowa
and New Hampshire. Their next
debate will be in Iowa on
January 28, the Thursday before
the caucuses.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with that
backdrop, it's the perfect time
to turn to the analysis of
Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and New York Times
columnist David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mark, what do
you make of that debate last
night?
MARK SHIELDS: Trump, Cruz, I
think that no question about it.
I think, more than anything
else, what I got was a sense of
how dominant Donald Trump has
been in setting the terms of the
debate in both parties in 2016.
I mean, candidates in
both parties -- maybe not Bernie
Sanders, but virtually everybody
else -- is responding
to or reacting to.
I mean, we saw Marco Rubio doing
sort of a feisty, aggressive,
not a knock-off Donald
Trump, but sort of a variation
of it -- that and Ted Cruz's
first unforced error of the
season by his New York,
New York. He gave...
(COUGHING)
MARK SHIELDS: Pardon me.
He gave Trump -- I apologize --
a great opening, which he took
advantage of.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why don't
you take a sip of water?
And let me turn to David.
Do you have the same
impression from...
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I'm sort of
cross-pressured on that. I'm an
American citizen born in Canada,
like Cruz, but I'm from New
York, so I have got New York
values.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: So, I don't
know who to dislike more.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But it is a
Cruz-Trump show right now. And,
to me, the paradox is that
I thought Cruz won the debate,
just had better debating points.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You did? You did?
DAVID BROOKS: I thought he was
-- on some of the stuff, on the
birther stuff, I thought
he's just more forceful. He's
more skillful as a debater.
But, as Mark said, Trump
dominates the discussion, and so
he's the central figure. Cruz
may beat
him, but Trump is still the
story. And if you're looking for
a strong leader, which
apparently -- the Republican
Party apparently is, well, Trump
is still the main arena. And
so he can afford to lose a
debate and still come out ahead.
And that's where I think we
are right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, where is
that -- where does that
translate into, though, Mark?
Where
does that leave this race? Does
it mean it's down to Donald
Trump and Ted Cruz?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, all the
numbers in Iowa suggests it's
the two of them, and with Marco
Rubio nipping at the heels and
Ben Carson sort of fading in
fourth or somewhere.
As an example of Trump, let me
just give you what I thought was
-- it was a brilliant
formulation
he did on the birther issue. He
did the birther issue against
President Obama, you will
recall.
He had his people in Hawaii who
had uncovered all of this
information, which turned out
to be totally bogus, as so much
of the charges and allegations
always have been.
But what he did with Cruz was --
on the birther issue wasn't that
he was born in Calgary,
in Alberta, Canada, but that
he's putting the party at risk
by opening himself up to
a legal suit. And...
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, if I made
him my vice presidential...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, even if I
made him my vice president.
So, all of a sudden, he puts
Cruz on the defensive of trying
to prove a negative. It really
is
-- it's shrewd.
At the same time, Judy, I do
want to give a shout-out, quite
bluntly, to Jeb Bush. He
demonstrated character. He's
demonstrated character on the
issue. And the Republicans,
to a man, without Jeb Bush and
without Lindsey Graham no longer
in the race, and with the
possible exception of John
Kasich, quite frankly, but they
were anti-Muslim.
I mean, they were bigoted and
narrow-minded and intolerant.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When they were
asked, would you keep Muslims
out of the country?
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: And Jeb Bush
pointed out, well, you are
talking about Indonesia, you are
talking
about India, you are talking
about the Kurds, you are talking
about our friends. I mean,
this is an absolutely
irrational policy.
But, you know, but he stood
alone, with the possible
exception of Kasich.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, does that
mean something, though, for Jeb
Bush? Does it -- does that
translate into
something for him?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, Jeb Bush is
part of a large group of people
who are like the team
at halftime who -- like the
Republican establishment, who
feel like they're down 50 points
and they
have decided they're
going to lose the game.
And that's how the Republican
establishment is right now. They
don't believe that Ted
Cruz or Donald Trump can win.
They think it could imperil
their majorities in Congress,
and yet they're doing
nothing about it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But
what could they do?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I wish we
had gray men in suits. We don't
have that.
But the donor class could do
something. Frankly, the country
is filled with state legislators
who are Republicans,
congressmen, senators, local
committeemen, a lot of whom are
in panic.
And so maybe they should do
something about it. Maybe they
should have a MoveOn.org-type
organization and get some
rallying, which the other side
has already done, and have
a counterweight, so they don't
send the party into suicide.
And that might involve, not now,
but after New Hampshire,
winnowing the field, and donors
and other people going and
saying, we're just going to pick
this guy. We're going to pick
Rubio. I'm sorry, Jeb, you're
not going to be president.
Christie, you can be secretary
of treasury, but we're going to
get organized here and we're not
going to go quietly into
the night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, go back to
some kind of smoke-filled room?
I mean, is that...
DAVID BROOKS: I'm
pro-conspiracy right now.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: You think
it's that critical?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, you know,
I'm sort of -- I have no
confidence in my judgment. I
shouldn't say that on TV.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Because...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark and I have
confidence in your judgment.
DAVID BROOKS: Because I thought
Trump would fade. And I still
sort of think he will fade.
But it's not looking...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sort of?
You have backed...
DAVID BROOKS: I mean, it's --
right now, Trump and Cruz are
both looking pretty good. And
I don't think either is
electable, and neither do a lot
of Republicans. And so the
question
is, why do they just sit
there and do nothing?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, but, I
mean, that -- Mark, again, that
raises the question. What about
these other candidates? There is
Rubio, there's Christie, there's
Jeb Bush, there's John Kasich.
Why are they having so much
difficulty rising and getting
critical mass?
MARK SHIELDS: I think they're
having sleepless nights trying
to figure it out, Judy.
I mean, John Kasich insists on
mentioning in every sentence
that he served 18 years
in the House of Representatives,
which is a disqualification in
the current climate.
If you have spent more than two
high school tours in Washington,
that makes you morally
suspect to these primary voters.
Jeb Bush, 75 percent of
Republicans said as recently as
last June that they could vote
for Jeb Bush, see themselves
voting for Jeb Bush for
president in November. That's
down
in the same Wall Street
Journal/NBC poll out last night
to 42 percent.
For some reason, you know,
they're visiting a wrath that
they feel toward his brother.
I mean, remember, the Tea Party
was spawned at some degree in
reaction to what they felt
had been the -- not the
perfidiousness, but certainly
the breaking with the
conservative
compact of the Bush years on
immigration, on spending, on any
number of issues.
And with the others, Christie is
running a one-state campaign. I
mean, he's running in
New Hampshire. If he were to do
well, I don't know where he goes
from there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Because
he has to do well there.
MARK SHIELDS: He has
to do well there.
So, that's -- Rubio is -- you
know, Rubio is everybody's
second choice. But he's got
to have a victory. And I
don't know where that is.
DAVID BROOKS: And I'm not sure
he's taking the right tack by
trying to be Ted Cruz-lite.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: He's darkened his
tone. He's gone on the attack on
immigration and all
the other stuff.
And, to me, you want to be the
alternative. You don't want --
if you -- if people want
the Cruz mood, they are
going to vote for Ted Cruz.
MARK SHIELDS: That's
exactly right.
DAVID BROOKS: And then Mark has
made this point about other
campaigns.
When A and B attack each other,
sometimes, C benefits. But if
it's C, D, E, F, and G,
it's not going to benefit. So
they got to have a C. And so I
think a lot is going to
happen. Iowa and New Hampshire,
I do not think are going to
decide this thing. We are going
to go through a lot of states.
So, a lot can happen down the
road.
But, somehow, somebody has got
to take some initiative if it's
not going to be Ted Cruz.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, meanwhile,
over on the Democratic side, the
Hillary Clinton camp
is feeling some anxiety, Mark,
over Bernie Sanders, who's doing
better in Iowa, has been
doing well in New Hampshire.
We have seen a really
interesting back and forth, I
mean, her camp going after
Sanders
this week in a way
they weren't before.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. It was kind
of good old Bernie, until he
became a threat. As Bernie
rose in the polls, he became a
more formidable adversary, but
also a more menacing adversary.
The Clinton campaign this week,
in perhaps the stupidest act of
the entire year, took
the one person who's a character
witness, who is a privileged
observer of Hillary Clinton,
who can testify about Hillary
Clinton as a human being, as a
mother, as a grandmother,
as somebody who's always been
there, who's been a force for
decency in her life, who's
taught her and loved her,
Chelsea Clinton, and turned her
into a political hack.
I mean, it was just absolutely
reckless and stupid. They
neutralized the advantage and
the value of Chelsea Clinton by
turning her into an attack dog
on a phony charge that
Bernie Sanders, a supporter of
single-payer national health
insurance, is somehow going
to dismantle children's
health and Medicare.
I mean, it was -- it tells you
how nervous, how dumb, what bad
judgment there is in that
campaign.
DAVID BROOKS: They're worse on
the attack. They're worse on the
counterattack.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: They
tend to overreact.
And if I were Hillary Clinton, I
would think, I may lose Iowa and
New Hampshire, it's possible,
but I got a lot of big states
with more diverse electorates.
I'm still fine. And so don't
poison the brand.
And so I think they're just
getting too combative,
overreacting and making it
worse. Now, I understand
why they're concerned. There is
a gigantic anti-establishment
mood in both parties. I
understand that. But there is --
so far, there is little evidence
that Sanders can translate
early victories into victories
in states, frankly, where there
are more minority voters,
more -- more -- frankly, more
conventional and more
representative of the country.
And she's still sitting pretty
in those states, and she should
just let it be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you think she
should just relax and not worry
about losing Iowa and
New Hampshire?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, unless she
can counterattack effectively,
not with something that is
plainly
disingenuous.
If you're going to hit a weak
spot, Bernie Sanders' weak spot
is not that he is against
health care for people who
need health insurance.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. Bernie
Sanders, whatever else, you look
at him, he's not pretty. He's
not a backslapper.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, his
wife would disagree.
MARK SHIELDS: No, no, but he's
not a storyteller. He's not
somebody you say, oh, gee, I
want
a cuddly Bernie, or, boy,
he's a well-polished guy.
He's authentic. He's absolutely
authentic. And this attack was
synthetic. It was fabricated.
And I would say that there is a
concern in the Clinton campaign.
What you have got to
do is somehow project her as a
more likable person. This didn't
make her a more likable
person or candidate.
And, Judy, nobody has been
nominated in the modern era who
lost both Iowa and New
Hampshire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Oh.
MARK SHIELDS: So,
there's a chemistry.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, maybe she
shouldn't relax about losing...
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, but
this isn't a normal year.
And -- go ahead.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: No, I just think
that momentum could be
dangerous, and especially how
you
lose them.
If you lose them looking
mean-spirited and small-minded,
it can't be helpful in Nevada.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. In some
sense, I almost feel like the
big question is not day to day.
It's how deep is the disgust in
the country. It's the tectonic
question.
And if the disgust in the
country is -- it's certainly
deeper than -- we all knew it
was
there. But there is a level of
anger which is not only there,
but building. And I think
events are building it, even the
attacks on Cologne, especially
on the Republican side,
building that anger. And that
could sweep away the -- all the
establishment candidates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All
right, on that note...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks and
Mark Shields, thank you both.
MARK SHIELDS: Thanks. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
Silicon Valley, the home of the
California tech industry, has
long been criticized for
its lack of diversity. Almost
two years after major companies,
led by Google and Intel,
started to publicize their
diversity numbers, the ethnic
and gender makeup of the
industry's
work force remains
almost the same.
Analysis of employees at the
leading tech firms that report
such figures reveals, on
average, 71 percent are men, 29
percent are women, 60 percent
identify as white, 23 percent
Asian, 8 percent Latino,
and 7 percent black.
So, what exactly is Silicon
Valley doing to improve its
diversity?
Hari Sreenivasan takes a look
in the first of two stories.
JOELLE EMERSON, CEO, Paradigm:
Raise your hand if you have
heard of unconscious bias
before?
HARI SREENIVASAN: The notion
that hidden bias can be
methodically stamped out of the
workplace
has become popular with tech
companies across Silicon Valley.
JOELLE EMERSON: By managing
unconscious bias, we make better
decisions. So, unconscious
bias acts as a significant
barrier to objective,
data-driven decision making.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That was the
message being delivered by
Joelle Emerson, a former sexual
harassment litigator who now
spends most of her time helping
multibillion-dollar start-ups
diversify their work forces.
JOELLE EMERSON: We think that if
you can get this right early,
you're going to much more
successfully, more organically
grow as an inclusive company,
rather than starting when
you're so far down the line.
If the word is associated with
female, I want you to raise your
right hand and say the word
right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On this day,
Emerson is conducting a workshop
at Slack, a $2.8 billion
start-up just named company of
the year by "Inc." magazine.
Even though his company is
still young, Slack CEO Stewart
Butterfield is still playing a
little catchup.
STEWART BUTTERFIELD, CEO, Slack:
We didn't get started in the
beginning, right? This
company was co-founded by four
white men. But it was something
that became apparent
as a priority to us when we were
relatively small, you know,
about 30 or 40 people.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Known for its
workplace communication app,
Slack is regarded as one
of the hottest and fastest
growing tech start-ups.
STEWART BUTTERFIELD: We are
growing incredibly quickly. I
mean, we have to do a lot of
hiring,
which means that there's a lot
of positions that need to get
filled. Every week, there's
new people starting. Every
week, there's open roles.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And when
there's rapid growth, a natural
inclination is to recruit from
familiar
networks.
Senior engineer Erica Baker says
that's at the core of tech's
diversity problem.
ERICA BAKER, Engineer, Slack:
There's a lot of focus put on,
like, hiring people you know,
who you're comfortable with or
whatever. And a lot of people
who get into Silicon Valley
come from backgrounds that are
predominantly white, and so they
hire the people that they
know, who are predominantly
white, and it's cyclical. It
will take someone, like,
stopping
that cycle purposefully
to fix it.
ANNE TOTH, Vice President for
People and Policy, Slack: We're
going to be hiring a lot of
people
next year.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Slack's vice
president for people and policy,
Anne Toth, says she's working
hard to break that cycle.
ANNE TOTH: One of the things I'm
trying to do here, early stage,
is build the type of
tools from the outset that allow
us to look at the data in real
time and make adjustments
as we go. Are we promoting women
and people of color at the same
rate? Are we retaining
them at the same rate? Are we
paying them equitably? Are they
as engaged as other employees
across the board?
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the day we
visited, Toth and diversity
consultant Joelle Emerson were
reviewing questions with a
group of hiring managers
JOELLE EMERSON: Where we often
go wrong is that we ask
questions that produce answers
that cannot be objectively
evaluated, that almost force us
to draw on unconscious biases,
on subjectivity, on our own
beliefs about the world to
evaluate the candidate's answer.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The goal, to
eliminate any potential bias
that might unfairly favor one
type of applicant over another.
WOMAN: What do you do for fun?
What do you think of that
question?
WOMAN: We want to know more
about who you are, not just what
you do for work.
JOELLE EMERSON: We don't want to
take the humanity out of this
process, but it really
isn't relevant to your ability
to do work here, what you do for
fun. And what if what
you do for fun is different than
what the person who happens to
be interviewing you
does for fun, that can be really
challenging. What if my answer
is, I don't have a whole
lot of time for a lot of fun, I
have two kids right now that are
infants, and mostly my
spare time is spent
taking care of them?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Despite these
efforts, Slack's diversity
numbers are still not
dramatically
different from the industry.
Seventy percent of its employees
are white, and 61 percent
are men.
But CEO Stewart Butterfield says
there are some encouraging
trends.
STEWART BUTTERFIELD: Forty-one
percent of employees at Slack
report to a woman; 45 percent
of the managers and executives
are women. So, that's definitely
better than the industry
average.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For Erica
Baker, an African-American
engineer, diversity is about
race, as well
as gender.
ERICA BAKER: Right now, it seems
like, in the industry, that
diversity is code for hire
more women. That is what
diversity has become. And it's
not great, because the
demographics
of the industry, usually, it
skews to more white women.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But Baker says
she is encouraged by the
direction Slack is heading.
Seven percent
of the company's engineers are
African-American. Compare that
with the industry average of
1 percent to 2 percent.
To change the demographics of an
industry takes time, and one
long-term effort involves
encouraging more women and
people of color to study
engineering. Many companies are
now
sponsoring training for high
school and college students like
this code camp hosted by the
mobile payment firm Square.
JACK DORSEY, CEO, Square: One of
the things I have always loved
about programming and
computer science is that you can
truly build something from
scratch.
HARI SREENIVASAN: While CEO Jack
Dorsey has not yet publicized
square's diversity figures,
his executive team includes
several women in key roles, like
chief financial officer
and head of engineering.
VANESSA SLAVICH, Diversity Lead,
Square: At Square, we started at
the top. So, our board
of directors is really diverse.
They're driving the company. You
move down to our executive
team, four out nine of the
people who report to Jack are
CEO-quality women who are
running
a majority of the company.
And so, if we can prioritize
from the top, from our board to
the executive team, inevitably,
it will trickle down.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Vanessa
Slavich, diversity lead at
Square, says the company is
constantly
on the lookout for tools that
will help widen the pool of
prospective employees.
VANESSA SLAVICH: So, here, we
have a job description for our
data scientist team.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One such tool
is Textio. The software uses a
form of artificial intelligence
to detect bias in the
job descriptions.
VANESSA SLAVICH: This
is the before copy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On a scale of
one to 100, it scores 47.
Phrases like rapidly growing
are regarded as inclusive,
builds relationships feminine,
and words like relentlessly
masculine.
Once all the changes are made,
the newly revised job
description scores a 95.
VANESSA SLAVICH: We did a small
anonymous test with our job
descriptions before and
after, and they doubled in
applications for both men and
women.
HARI SREENIVASAN: While such
efforts can widen the pool of
candidates, Slack's Erica Baker
says real, lasting change will
require a cultural shift in the
workplace, taking people beyond
their comfort zones.
ERICA BAKER: People should know
that you're going to feel weird
about talking about race.
Just like sit with it and, like,
then move past it. But it's
going to get uncomfortable.
And I think people shy away from
talking about those sorts of
things because it is
uncomfortable.
But I think that we need to get
to the uncomfortable spaces to
make good progress.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Progress will
likely take time, especially
with older and larger companies.
In our next story, we visit
Google to see how the tech giant
is trying to make its culture
more inclusive.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Part two of
Hari's look at diversity in
Silicon Valley airs tomorrow
on "PBS NewsHour Weekend."
Finally tonight: the launch of a
new series on PBS, its first
original American drama
in more than a decade.
Jeffrey Brown visited the set of
"Mercy Street" in Richmond,
Virginia, and has this preview.
JEFFREY BROWN: Spring 1862: The
carnage on the Civil War goes
on, and some of the wounded
and dying are brought here
to Mansion House Hospital.
ACTOR: Ah. You must be the new
nurse. I am Dr. Hale, chief
operating surgeon.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Mercy Street" is
a dramatized account based on
memoirs and letters of doctors
and nurses who served at a Union
facility that also took in a
handful of Confederate
soldiers.
The real Mansion House, a
one-time luxury hotel
transformed into an Army
hospital, was
in Alexandria, Virginia, just
south of Washington. The series
was filmed further south in
Petersburg,
Virginia, as well as in Richmond
at a Civil War-period mansion,
where we visited last
summer as shooting
was wrapping up.
Josh Radnor plays Jedediah
Foster, a civilian surgeon now
caught up in the pain,
frustrations
and blood of the war.
JOSH RADNOR, Actor: Be prepared.
This may bleed a bit.
ACTRESS: Yes.
JOSH RADNOR: It's life and death
in a hospital. Plus, you throw
the Civil War on top of it,
you have got pretty much the
most dramatic situation you
could ever imagine.
There's this feeling that it's
entirely grounded in its time
and place, and, at the same
time,
it feels modern and urgent and
vital. It feels like you're
walking into this, like,
bustling,
alive, relatable story with
people that you recognize
somehow.
ACTOR: This is what
happens to traitors.
JEFFREY BROWN: Alexandria was
the only Confederate town
occupied by the Union for all
four years
of the war, and much of the
drama here involves the
interaction of Northerners and
Southerners.
They're enemies, but also at
times forced to work side by
side, as with two volunteer
nurses, one
a staunch New England
abolitionist, the other an
inexperienced young woman whose
life has
been upended by occupation.
Mary Elizabeth Winstead plays
the Northerner Mary Phinney.
MARY ELIZABETH WINSTEAD,
Actress: Both feel very
passionately about what they
believe
in, but, as the series goes on,
you kind of see the complexities
in who they both are,
and they find ways to connect,
even though they have such
differing views on such very
big, big issues. They see the
humanity in one another and are
able to kind of to work
alongside each other.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ridley Scott
served as executive producer of
the series. It was created and
written by David Zabel and Lisa
Wolfinger, he known for his work
writing and overseeing
the hit network drama "ER," she
a veteran writer and producer of
films and TV programs.
LISA WOLFINGER, Producer, "Mercy
Street": I thought, well, maybe,
maybe we can find
a new way to tell an old story.
And it hit me that nobody has
ever really explored the
medical side of it. We kind of
like to think of this show as
"Gone With the Wind" meets
"MASH."
DAVID ZABEL, Producer, "Mercy
Street": We wanted to find a way
to find the drama in
the medical. How do we tell the
story of medical advances during
the Civil War, but infuse
it with drama? And Alexandria,
Virginia, became this great
window into all -- a whole bunch
of different aspects of the war
and all kinds of different
characters.
It really became much more of a
family saga combined with a
medical drama combined with
sort of a wartime epic.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the most
complex and moving stories in
"Mercy Street" is that of
Samuel Diggs, a free black
working as a orderly in the
hospital.
He'd grown up a servant in the
home of a Philadelphia doctor
and, unbeknownst to the Mansion
House
staff, had learned a great deal
about medical practice. As the
story unfolds, he gets the
chance to do work otherwise
denied him in a segregated
society.
I'm talking to a man with a
lot of blood on his sleeve.
MCKINLEY BELCHER
III, Actor: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well-earned?
MCKINLEY BELCHER III:
Well-earned. This is actually
the blood of my love on my
sleeves.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: The
blood of your love?
MCKINLEY BELCHER III: Yes,
the blood of my love.
We did a scene yesterday, all
yesterday, that we were sort of
operating on her, so, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Actor McKinley
Belcher III told us this role
had special meaning for
him.
MCKINLEY BELCHER III: I think,
for Samuel, that how strongly he
feels about being a doctor
and being involved in the
medical world is something
that's sort of at the forefront
of his mind all the time.
I'm playing a young man who is
single-minded, in many ways a
positive image of a young black
man, and who is career-oriented,
has integrity, and a sort of
quiet strength about him. It
makes me really proud to put
that out in the world. And I
think, in some ways, as an
artist,
I have to be responsible for the
images I portray and for the
truth I put out in the
world. And I'm
proud of this one.
JEFFREY BROWN: The producers
also clearly took some pride in
the series' authenticity.
A Civil War hospital was no
setting for the squeamish.
Amputations were performed
numerous
times each day with
minimal or no anesthesia.
We're standing in front of a
pretty bloody scene, right, at
least fake blood.
Surgeon and medical historian
Stanley Burns served as
consultant to the series.
DR. STANLEY BURNS, Consultant:
This is a capital operating kit.
This is what a surgeon used
during the war. And there were
several of them at each
regiment. For instance, we show
in one of the scenes -- let me
take this out -- they're still
sharp and problematical.
And so, this is a capital
amputation saw. They actually
took the saw, you see, around
the arm, and then, in one
fell swoop, cut it off.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's
how you do it, yes.
DR. STANLEY BURNS: The whole
amputation, if the surgeons were
slow, it would take five
minutes, but a good, experienced
surgeon could do it, complete an
amputation in two minutes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Series creators
Wolfinger and Zabel say they
worked hard for realism and
were happy PBS embraced it.
LISA WOLFINGER: PBS was such a
natural home for it, and I think
in many ways we designed
it for PBS.
DAVID ZABEL: If we tried to tell
this story in a lot of other
places, there would be a
lot more pressure to, I think,
stray, stray from the facts,
from the history.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a view of
history not from the
battlefield, but through the
lives
of those trying to
heal its victims.
The six-part miniseries "Mercy
Street" premieres Sunday night.
From Richmond, Virginia, I'm
Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can
stream the first episode of
"Mercy Street" online right now
about PBS.org. And the broadcast
premiere is Sunday on most PBS
stations.
Now we turn to a "NewsHour"
Shares, something that caught
our eye that we thought might
be of interest to you.
The New York Public Library
recently made available a
collection of more than 180,000
images in high resolution to the
public. It's a treasure trove
reaching back centuries,
all accessible with the click of
a mouse. The earliest images
date back to the 11th
century, ornately decorated
Persian manuscripts from "The
Book of Kings," a view of the
world
through the eyes of 18th century
mapmakers, scenes of devastation
from San Francisco's
earthquake and Chicago's Great
Fire, and a look America's
pastime played by the game's
all-time greats and
some serious fans.
All of these and more can found
at publicdomain.nypl.org.
And on the "NewsHour" online
right now: It turns out we share
more than just fun times
with our friends. A new study of
chimpanzees shows that being
social helps diversify the
bacteria in primates' bodies,
boosting resistance to
infection. In other words,
friends keep
us healthy.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Later tonight on "Washington
Week": why political rhetoric is
getting more personal and
divisive
on the 2016 campaign trail, plus
a deep dive into President
Obama's final State of the
Union. Was it about his legacy
or the race to succeed him?
That's tonight on "Washington
Week."
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
Saturday: A program in Brooklyn,
New York, aims to reduce the
number of outstanding arrest
warrants for low-level crimes.
NARRATOR: On a Saturday morning,
a crowd waits outside the Mount
Lebanon Baptist Church in
Brooklyn, New York. Hundreds
more pack the sanctuary inside.
They're seeking forgiveness,
not from a higher power, but
from New York City's criminal
justice system.
The event is called Begin Again.
MAN: I'm here to clear up a past
warrant that I had for
trespassing.
MAN: There's nothing worse than
walking around the city and
having a cloud hanging over your
head.
NARRATOR: Brooklyn district
attorney Kenneth Thompson
started Begin Again last year.
KENNETH THOMPSON, Brooklyn
District Attorney: Warrants
never go away. So, when people
apply
for jobs, they come up in
background checks. It could
affect someone's application for
citizenship. It could affect
someone's ability to get
housing. So, there are real
consequences
to outstanding warrants.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
That's this weekend.
And tonight on "Charlie Rose:
The Week": Actor Sean Penn
defends his controversial
interview
with the drug cartel boss
Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman.
SEAN PENN, Actor: I had only
that I thought this is somebody
upon whose interview could
I begin a conversation about the
policy of the war on drugs. That
was my simple idea.
CHARLIE ROSE, Host, "The Charlie
Rose Show": You wanted to have a
conversation about the
policy of a war on drugs?
SEAN PENN: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More of that
tonight on "Charlie Rose: The
Week."
And we will be back right here
on Monday with a wrap-up of the
Sunday night Democratic debate
and more on Politics Monday.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank
you, and good night.